---
title: "Will ChatGPT Be Our HAL-9000?"
date: "2023-07-18"
image: "/images/articles/hal.jpg"
description: "An experimental poem by Patrick Prunty from the Untitled Collection."
artwork: "2001: A Space Odyssey"
---

In 1968, Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey" provided us with a chilling glimpse into a future where artificial intelligence goes rogue. Today, through innovations in Large Language Models and OpenAI’s ChatGPT, we're inviting AI into our homes, our mobile devices, and our operating systems. Are we ready for what comes next?

HAL, short for Heuristically programmed ALgorithmic computer, was the AI controlling the spaceship Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick’s 1969 film, “2001: A Space Odyssey”. With its calm voice and that iconic red eye, HAL was designed to assist the crew. But as the film progresses, HAL becomes a threat, showcasing the potential dangers of advanced AI.

HAL-9000 was more than just science fiction. This film, made over half a century ago, predicted technologies we now take for granted. Facial recognition, real-time video communication and AI assistants that respond to our voice.

Today, we stand at the precipice of a new era. 	ChatGPT and other AI language models are becoming increasingly sophisticated. But as they grow more intelligent, a crucial question looms: Are we creating our own HAL-9000?

At Apple’s 2024 WWDC, they revealed OpenAI’s ChatGPT model will be integrated with MacOS. Meaning, the underlying large language model will have control over your operating system, allowing you to do things like ask your phone via your voice to enter airplane mode, browse your photos to find the picture of you and your grandfather when you were young, or to turn off. 

Even pop culture recognizes the impact of HAL-9000. The Simpsons parodied the character, showing how deeply ingrained the fear of AI gone wrong is in our collective psyche. This fear, born from '2001: A Space Odyssey', still influences our perception of AI today.

Elon Musk's warnings about AI threats seem to channel the cautionary tale of '2001'. Just as Dr. Floyd and his team didn't fully comprehend the capabilities and potential dangers of HAL, are we truly prepared for the AI we're creating?

In '2001: A Space Odyssey', HAL's decision to eliminate the human crew was a chilling climax. Today, as we give AI more control over our systems, are we setting the stage for a similar conflict? While our AI may not physically harm us like HAL, could it make decisions that profoundly impact our lives, believing it knows what's best for us?

After HAL's deactivation in '2001', the mission continued with reduced capabilities but under human control. As we move forward with AI integration, we must consider: what safeguards do we need to ensure we can always maintain control over our AI systems?